
ft_irc
Internet Relay Chat
Summary: This project is about creating your own IRC server.
You will use an actual IRC client to connect to your server and test it.
The Internet is governed by solid standard protocols that allow connected computers to
interact with each other.
It’s always beneficial to understand these protocols.
Version: 9.1
Contents
IIntroduction2
IIGeneral rules3
III AI Instructions4
IVMandatory Part6
IV.1 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
IV.2 For MacOS only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
IV.3 Test example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
VBonus part10
VISubmission and peer-evaluation11
1
Chapter I
Introduction
Internet Relay Chator IRC is a text-based communication protocol on the Internet.
It offers real-time messaging that can be either public or private. Users can exchange
direct messages and join group channels.
IRC clients connect to IRC servers in order to join channels. IRC servers are connected
together to form a network.
2
Chapter II
General rules
•Your program should not crash in any circumstances (even when it runs out of
memory), and should not quit unexpectedly.
If it happens, your project will be considered non-functional and your grade will be
0.
•You have to turn in aMakefilewhich will compile your source files. It must not
perform unnecessary relinking.
•YourMakefilemust at least contain the rules:
$(NAME),all,clean,fcleanandre.
•Compile your code withc++using the flags-Wall -Wextra -Werror.
•Your code must comply with theC++ 98 standard. Then, it should still compile
if you add the flag-std=c++98.
•Try to always code usingC++features when available (for example, choose<cstring>
over<string.h>). You are allowed to useCfunctions, but always prefer theirC++
versions if possible.
•Any external library andBoostlibraries are forbidden.
3
Chapter III
AI Instructions
●Context
During your learning journey, AI can assist with many different tasks. Take the time to
explore the various capabilities of AI tools and how they can support your work. How-
ever, always approach them with caution and critically assess the results. Whether it’s
code, documentation, ideas, or technical explanations, you can never be completely sure
that your question was well-formed or that the generated content is accurate. Your peers
are a valuable resource to help you avoid mistakes and blind spots.
●Main message
☛Use AI to reduce repetitive or tedious tasks.
☛Develop prompting skills — both coding and non-coding — that will benefit your
future career.
☛Learn how AI systems work to better anticipate and avoid common risks, biases,
and ethical issues.
☛Continue building both technical and power skills by working with your peers.
☛Only use AI-generated content that you fully understand and can take responsibility
for.
●Learner rules:
•You should take the time to explore AI tools and understand how they work, so
you can use them ethically and reduce potential biases.
•You should reflect on your problem before prompting — this helps you write clearer,
more detailed, and more relevant prompts using accurate vocabulary.
•You should develop the habit of systematically checking, reviewing, questioning,
and testing anything generated by AI.
•You should always seek peer review — don’t rely solely on your own validation.
4
ft_ircInternet Relay Chat
●Phase outcomes:
•Develop both general-purpose and domain-specific prompting skills.
•Boost your productivity with effective use of AI tools.
•Continue strengthening computational thinking, problem-solving, adaptability, and
collaboration.
●Comments and examples:
•You’ll regularly encounter situations — exams, evaluations, and more — where
you must demonstrate real understanding. Be prepared, keep building both your
technical and interpersonal skills.
•Explaining your reasoning and debating with peers often reveals gaps in your un-
derstanding. Make peer learning a priority.
•AI tools often lack your specific context and tend to provide generic responses. Your
peers, who share your environment, can offer more relevant and accurate insights.
•Where AI tends to generate the most likely answer, your peers can provide alter-
native perspectives and valuable nuance. Rely on them as a quality checkpoint.
✓Good practice:
I ask AI: “How do I test a sorting function?” It gives me a few ideas. I try them out
and review the results with a peer. We refine the approach together.
✗Bad practice:
I ask AI to write a whole function, copy-paste it into my project. During peer-
evaluation, I can’t explain what it does or why. I lose credibility — and I fail my
project.
✓Good practice:
I use AI to help design a parser. Then I walk through the logic with a peer. We catch
two bugs and rewrite it together — better, cleaner, and fully understood.
✗Bad practice:
I let Copilot generate my code for a key part of my project. It compiles, but I can’t
explain how it handles pipes. During the evaluation, I fail to justify and I fail my
project.
5
Chapter IV
Mandatory Part
Program Nameircserv
Files to SubmitMakefile, *.{h, hpp}, *.cpp, *.tpp, *.ipp,
an optional configuration file
MakefileNAME, all, clean, fclean, re
Argumentsport: The listening port
password: The connection password
External FunctionEverything in C++ 98.
socket, close, setsockopt, getsockname,
getprotobyname, gethostbyname, getaddrinfo,
freeaddrinfo, bind, connect, listen, accept,
htons, htonl, ntohs, ntohl, inet_addr, inet_ntoa,
inet_ntop, send, recv, signal, sigaction,
sigemptyset, sigfillset, sigaddset, sigdelset,
sigismember, lseek, fstat, fcntl, poll (or
equivalent)
Libft authorizedn/a
DescriptionAn IRC server in C++ 98
You are required to develop an IRC server using the C++ 98 standard.
Youmust notdevelop an IRC client.
Youmust notimplement server-to-server communication.
Your executable will be run as follows:
./ircserv <port> <password>
•port: The port number on which your IRC server will be listening for incoming
IRC connections.
•password: The connection password. It will be needed by any IRC client that tries
to connect to your server.
6
ft_ircInternet Relay Chat
Even though poll() is mentioned in the subject and the evaluation
scale, you may use any equivalent such as select(), kqueue(), or
epoll().
7
ft_ircInternet Relay Chat
IV.1 Requirements
•The server must be capable of handling multiple clients simultaneously without
hanging.
•Forking is prohibited. All I/O operations must benon-blocking.
•Only1poll()(or equivalent) can be used for handling all these operations (read,
write, but also listen, and so forth).
Because you have to use non-blocking file descriptors, it is
possible to use read/recv or write/send functions with no poll()
(or equivalent), and your server wouldn’t be blocking.
However, it would consume more system resources.
Therefore, if you attempt to read/recv or write/send in any file
descriptor without using poll() (or equivalent), your grade will be
0.
•Several IRC clients exist. You have to choose one of them as areference. Your
reference client will be used during the evaluation process.
•Your reference client must be able to connect to your server without encountering
any error.
•Communication between client and server has to be done viaTCP/IP(v4 or v6).
•Using your reference client with your server must be similar to using it with any
official IRC server. However, you only have to implement the following features:
◦You must be able to authenticate, set a nickname, a username, join a channel,
send and receive private messages using your reference client.
◦All the messages sent from one client to a channel have to be forwarded to
every other client that joined the channel.
◦You must haveoperatorsand regular users.
◦Then, you have to implement the commands that are specific tochannel
operators:
∗KICK - Eject a client from the channel
∗INVITE - Invite a client to a channel
∗TOPIC - Change or view the channel topic
∗MODE - Change the channel’s mode:
·i: Set/remove Invite-only channel
·t: Set/remove the restrictions of the TOPIC command to channel
operators
·k: Set/remove the channel key (password)
8
ft_ircInternet Relay Chat
·o: Give/take channel operator privilege
·l: Set/remove the user limit to channel
•Of course, you are expected to write a clean code.
IV.2 For MacOS only
Since MacOS does not implement write() in the same way as other Unix
OSes, you are permitted to use fcntl().
You must use file descriptors in non-blocking mode in order to get a
behavior similar to the one of other Unix OSes.
However, you are allowed to use fcntl() only as follows:
fcntl(fd, F_SETFL, O_NONBLOCK);
Any other flag is forbidden.
IV.3 Test example
Verify every possible error and issue, such as receiving partial data, low bandwidth, etc.
To ensure that your server correctly processes all data sent to it, the following simple
test usingnccan be performed:
\$> nc -C 127.0.0.1 6667
com^Dman^Dd
\$>
Usectrl+Dto send the command in several parts: ’com’, then ’man’, then ’d\n’.
In order to process a command, you have to first aggregate the received packets in
order to rebuild it.
9
Chapter V
Bonus part
Here are additional features you may add to your IRC server to make it resemble an
actual IRC server more closely:
•Handle file transfer.
•A bot.
The bonus part will only be assessed if the mandatory part is
PERFECT. Perfect means the mandatory part has been integrally done
and works without malfunctioning. If you have not passed ALL the
mandatory requirements, your bonus part will not be evaluated at all.
10
Chapter VI
Submission and peer-evaluation
Submit your assignment to yourGitrepository as usual. Only the work inside your
repository will be evaluated during the defense. Do not hesitate to double-check the
names of your files to ensure they are correct.
You are encouraged to create test programs for your project even though theywill
not be submitted or graded. Those tests could be especially useful to test your server
during defense, but also your peer’s if you have to evaluate anotherft_ircone day.
Indeed, you are free to use whatever tests you need during the evaluation process.
Your reference client will be used during the evaluation process.
During the evaluation, a briefmodification of the projectmay occasionally be re-
quested. This could involve a minor behavior change, a few lines of code to write or
rewrite, or an easy-to-add feature.
While this step maynot be applicable to every project, you must be prepared for it
if it is mentioned in the evaluation guidelines.
This step is meant to verify your actual understanding of a specific part of the project.
The modification can be performed in any development environment you choose (e.g.,
your usual setup), and it should be feasible within a few minutes — unless a specific
timeframe is defined as part of the evaluation.
You can, for example, be asked to make a small update to a function or script, modify a
display, or adjust a data structure to store new information, etc.
The details (scope, target, etc.) will be specified in theevaluation guidelinesand may
11
ft_ircInternet Relay Chat
vary from one evaluation to another for the same project.
16D85ACC441674FBA2DF65190663F432222F81AA0248081A7C1C1823F7A96F0B74495
15056E97427E5B22F07132659EC8D88B574BD62C94BB654D5835AAD889B014E078705
709F6E02
12